The Holy Spirit in utter allegiance to this mission given him by the Father and the Son will not quicken a heart to see nothing.
He will only quicken hearts to see Christ.
Therefore, if Christ is not placarded, the Holy Spirit will not open the eyes of the blind.
He is utterly devoted to the glory of the Son.
And therefore, when we preach the Son, the Holy Spirit comes and says, that is what I want people to see, I will open their eyes to it.
There's a kind of preaching that leaves you moved, but you're not sure exactly why.
And then there's preaching that makes Jesus so clear, so beautiful that your heart knows it's the Spirit at work.
I'm Dan Kruver.
In this episode of Light and Truth, John Piper shows why the spirit opens eyes only when Christ is held high.
This message was originally delivered in Wheaton, Illinois at the Act III Reformation Conference on October 28, 1999.
First a word about man.
Perhaps the title should be a little more crazy and
radical than it is because if I was standing in the lobby of the holiday in about 30 minutes ago watching CNN while they cleaned our room so we could get in.
And after I watched it, I thought, you know, the title of this pre-conference should probably be preaching God in a primate centered age.
Because
Here is this demonstration against doing experimental drugs on monkeys, precisely because monkeys have no more right or less right to be treated with dignity than you do.
That's a serious change in the seascape of American culture.
We hold these truths to be self-evident and so on that man, this or that.
So preaching in a man-centered age is more serious than we thought it was.
It's really man slash monkey-centered age.
And that makes my sense of urgency all the greater.
That's a word on man.
A word on preaching, I love to preach.
It is my life and I love to preach in the context of the local church and I love to preach in the context of worship, corporate worship.
I would rather preach in my church than do what I'm doing right now any day of the week because I love to preach to a flock of people in worship.
that build week after week after week upon common visions of who God is.
So know that I'm coming to you as utterly and totally biased toward preaching.
That's the word on preaching.
The word on God is that I love God more than I love preaching.
I love God as my Creator.
I love
to contemplate God as my maker.
I love to contemplate God as my sustainer, moment by moment.
Life and breath and everything comes from Him.
If my heart keeps beating until the end of this message, it will be a freely given gift of my maker.
And I love Him for treating me that way.
and for being that for me.
I love him as my Savior, that he has sent his Son into the world to cover all my sins and work out a perfect righteousness for me and impute it to me through the mere leaning on him alone.
I love him as my keeper and the portion that I expect to enjoy with ever increasing gladness forever and ever.
So this is an easy task for me, frankly.
This is very easy to extol preaching, to preach God, to preach to people who think monkeys are equal to man.
This is not a hard thing to do.
And I just want to ask now that God would come and put his anointing on this word.
So let's go to him and ask him to do it.
Oh, Father in Heaven, this is a very precious moment.
When pastor to pastor, we can extol together the glory of God in the preached word to people so adrift that they don't even know who they are created in the image of God destined for everlasting damnation or everlasting glory.
They don't have a clue.
They don't know their right hand.
from their left.
Our calling is so serious.
Would you grant now a sense of earnestness, seriousness in this hour?
And would you help me, Lord Jesus, help me?
To say what I ought to say concerning this matter, help Tom after me and help us to listen, make us docile to the word truth.
Keep us close to your word.
Come now I pray and help us in Jesus name.
Amen.
I'm going to read a text and if you want to turn there with me in your Bibles 2 Timothy chapter 3 or 16 to chapter 4 verse 5.
My topic to begin is the place of preaching or preaching this great God in the context of worship, corporate worship.
2 Timothy 3, 16.
All scripture is inspired by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for training in righteousness, so that the man of God may be adequate, equipped for every good work.
I solemnly charge you in the presence of God and of Christ Jesus, who is to judge the living and the dead, and by his appearing in his kingdom, preach the word.
Be ready in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with great patience and instruction.
For the time will come, they will not endure sound doctrine but wanting to have their ears tickled.
They will accumulate for themselves teachers in accordance with their desires and will turn away their ears from the truth and will turn aside to myths.
And here's the question I'm asking, why preaching assumes such a prominent place in corporate worship?
Is this just habit and tradition, or is there a warrant for it, biblically and theologically?
Is it rooted in Scripture?
Is it rooted in God that probably in this pulpit, Sunday by Sunday, I would guess that
Almost half probably of the service is devoted to the exposition of the Word of God as it is in my church.
I preach about 40 minutes or so every Sunday, following almost as long, singing and praying.
Why do we do it that way?
Why does this task of preaching assume such a prominent role
incorporate worship.
That's my question.
And there are several kinds of answers that you can give.
It's really two questions.
Let me divide it.
It's a question of why is the Word so prominent?
Why is the Word of God
And then this particular form, question two, this particular way of speaking or handling the word of God called preaching.
First, why is the words of prominent in corporate worship?
And then why is this way of doing it so prominent?
So let's take those one at a time.
And these are real basic and real obvious answers.
I think I'll pass over part of the answer, I think.
Not wanting to tread on any of Vatam's territory about Jesus is the Word and goes straight to the simple, straightforward question or observation of chapter 3, verse 16 here.
Second Timothy.
All Scripture is inspired by God.
That is an amazing state.
You really got to come to terms with this, brothers.
You have to come to terms with this.
Do you believe that?
That this book, my little NASV updated paperback, this book is God Breathe.
If that is true, if that is true, everything changes in the world.
What you do, ministry?
What you say in ministry, the way you counsel, the way you do funerals, the way you do weddings, the way you stand by hospital beds, the way you live your life, the way you handle your sexuality, the way you handle your money, the way you handle your community life.
Everything changes for the saints and for the pastor especially if it's true that the Bible is a God-breathed book, which I believe that it is.
No prophecy.
was ever made by an act of human will, but men moved by the Holy Spirit, spoke and I believe you could say, wrote from God.
So my first reason for why the Bible or the Word is prominent in worship is that God breathed this book and therefore when the book is read or studied or explained or heralded
God is speaking.
If it's done accurately and handled well, and when God is speaking, God is revealed, and when God is revealed, people worship.
You cannot worship apart from communing with God through the Word.
Worship that undertakes to do an in-run around the revelation of God through the Bible will become defective worship very quickly.
Worship hangs on the centrality of the Word.
So that's my first reason.
Here's the second one.
Worship is a response to the work of God, not just the self-revelation through Word, but that Word describing and doing the work of God.
It points to God
It is God's Word and gives it insight into his character and personality.
It describes works of God, but here's what I'm getting at.
The Word doesn't just portray God.
It performs the work of God.
The Word depicts God and does the work of God.
It expresses God's will and way and character.
and it effects God's will and His way in the world.
You see this all over the old and the new Testament from creation on Hebrews 11, 3.
By faith we know that the worlds were made by the Word of God.
So this whole world, glorious October fall that makes my spine tingle as I look at front campus where I
had so many spiritual breakthroughs 30 years ago.
God made that front campus.
God made those yellow trees.
God made the sky and the sun.
God did that with a word.
He just spoke and it was and he holds it in being by his word according to Hebrews chapter 1.
But there's a more immediate application to this here in the text that I read to you.
He doesn't just do his word, Jesus didn't just do his work by the word, though he did, fevers were cooled by the word, and lepers were cleansed by the word, and seas were calmed by the word, and the eyes of the blind were opened by the word, but there's something more immediately relevant for us in this text, and let me read it to you.
2 Timothy 3, 16 and 17, all Scripture is inspired by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for training and righteousness, so that the man of God might be adequate, fitted out and equipped for every good work.
So where does the work of God come from?
It comes from
the fitting power of the Word, the equipping power of the Word, the transforming power of the Word.
And if you relate this now to something Jesus said in Matthew 5, 16, let your light so shine before man that they may see your good deeds and give glory to your Father in heaven.
That's worship.
Giving glory to God in heaven is worship.
And where did it come from?
It came from beholding the works of the people of God in the world.
And where do the works of the people of God in the world come from?
According to verse 17 of 2 Timothy 3, they come from being fitted out by the Word of God.
So if you want to both preach in the context of worship as well as beget a worshiping people and a worship producing people, you stay with the Word.
You stay with the Word.
If you want your people to be so transformed that they live radical, different lives that make the world see something of God and give Him glory, then according to this logic, moving from 2 Timothy 3 17 to Matthew 5 16 to the glory of God, you stay with the Word.
You preach the Word.
You unfold the Word and you do it with all your might.
Oh, there's so much more evidence we could give.
Let me, I'm going to pass over Psalm 1 and Hebrews 4 and just sum up this first point with this.
Worship is about knowing and admiring and savoring God through his self-revelation in his word and by his works, which are produced by his word.
Worship comes from seeing God and savoring God, seeing and savoring.
And therefore the Word, which is where we see Him, how we come to taste, taste and see, savoring.
And therefore we stay with the Word and make it central.
But now that's only part of the answer
to why it's crucial for worship.
It's crucial for worship, the centrality of the word, because on the other side of this pulpit, there are people who are not going to see God and savor God apart from the quickening work of the Holy Spirit.
There has to be life in the pew.
There has to be new birth.
There has to be spiritual quickening.
The natural man does not receive what passes from this side to that side.
It's not welcomed.
It's not savored.
It's not understood.
It's considered foolishness or a stumbling block, unless the Holy Spirit does some transforming.
New birth.
And where does that come from?
1 Peter 1, 23.
You have been born again.
not of seed which is perishable, but imperishable.
That is, through the living and enduring word of God.
This is the gospel which we preach.
Now, we reformed types, and I know that this conference does not presume that everybody becomes is a reformed type, but I am.
One, we reform types need to be admonished and exhorted something here.
I love to stress the sovereignty of God in the conversion of sinners and that human beings left to themselves are dead and blind and deaf and hard and rebellious and don't have the natural capacity
to lift the little finger of their hand to make a move toward God, apart from grace.
I love to exalt that.
However, one can find himself exalting that direct, inner, illuminating, life-giving work of the Holy Spirit so much that you can easily neglect
that the Holy Spirit has in a most stunning way submitted Himself to the Word of God in the performance of this life-giving divine act, so that He always follows around the Word of God like a shadow and never
does his saving work in front of or without the word?
That is, don't believe that any pagan tribe that has never heard the gospel has the Holy Spirit regenerating people in it.
Don't believe it.
And don't believe that the Holy Spirit just moves willy-nilly throughout the culture of America, saving this one and that one
which maybe the Word will catch up to someday.
That isn't the way it happens.
The Holy Spirit moves like a shadow behind the Word of God, and there's a theological, biblical reason for that.
Christ said that the Holy Spirit will be given to glorify me.
I will send you a comforter, and his task will be to glorify me.
Therefore, the Holy Spirit in utter allegiance to this mission given him by the Father and the Son will not quicken a heart to see nothing.
He will only quicken hearts to see Christ.
Therefore, if Christ is not placarded, the Holy Spirit will not open the eyes of the blind.
He is utterly devoted to the glory of the Son.
And therefore, when we preach the Son, the Holy Spirit comes and says, that is what I want people to see.
I will open their eyes to it.
And therefore, since there has to be life in the pew for there to be worship in the sanctuary,
there has to be the Word in order for the Holy Spirit to move on the people to reveal the Word.
There's a profound reason for why the Spirit being fully God and very God will not move on His own in regenerating people without the Word declaring the glory of the Son.
So preach the Word.
in the center of worship.
Thank you for listening to this episode of Light and Truth, where we are committed to providing God-centered preaching to help you see Christ clearly and treasure Him truly.
I'm your host, Dan Kruver.
On our next episode, John Piper continues our eight-part series, Living and Dying for the Glory of Christ with a message titled,
God's designed for the pulpit.
I hope you'll join us.
For more resources, visit desiringgod.org.